Attendees: Sean Turner, Richard Barnes, Sean Turner, Brendan McMillion, Britta Hale, and Raphael Robert

# Issues

#287 [ Path-hash ]
 * Brendan will add OPEN ISSUE
 * RLB will check with Benjamin that heâ€™s OK with merging with the OPEN ISSUE there

#279 [ Ciphersuites ]
 * Raphael will address the requirements that sig scheme is fixed
 * Sean will send text about recommending conservatism
 * Raphael will reserve private space
 
#285 [ Ignored proposals ]
 * Brendan to change SHOULDs to MUSTs

#286 [ Committer update ]
  * Brendan to change Update to ClientInitKey

#294 [ DirectPath does not cover leaf ]
  * Brendan to make minor changes noted in PR

#295 [ Path -> PathSecret ]
 * OK to merge

# AOB: 
 * Raphael: Mechanism to send targeted messages within a group
    * Not broadcast, send to subgroup
    * E.g., read receipts want to go just to sender
 * RLB: Some issues that could use discussion / PRs
