Attendees: Brendan McMillan, Britta Hale, Ray Takor, and Sean Turner

# Issues/PRs
* #297 and #307
   * Sean: There seems to be rough consensus emerging around one signature scheme per group.
   * Britta: Concerned that this rough consensus is by such a small group and there are so few strong voices for the choice that we maybe should give it just a bit more time.
   * Britta: 
   * Sean: I will extend this call until a later time to .
* #296
   * Brendan: Surprised to see it on the list of PRs to be merged. There might be an issue if an extension is used in a groupâ€™s config, then it seems like it is mandatory for all clients to understand that extension.   
   * Sean: I will send out an email to prompt the discussions.
   * Brendan: If we do not come to closure on the list we can discuss it next week.
   * Sean: Yes.

# AOB
* None.
